Path of the Polymath
====================

 

I’m a college dropout who works for a prestigious tech company—there are a lot
(hundreds?) of people like me now. But I am not here by accident, and I had to
fundamentally change the way I operate to become successful. We live in a very
strange time indeed, and now more than ever, everything is against you.

But if you ever feel the deep burn of frustration with life, with the society
you’re forced to be part of, I promise it will be worth it to read this book and
think about what your ultimate potential is. It is safe to assume you will only
have the time to do one important thing during your life that will
matter—focusing on anything else is frivolous. So start taking baby steps now.
This book teaches you how to figure out if you have what it takes to reach that
level of existence.

 

1. Code and Crime
-----------------

I began practicing writing code after I went to jail. I wasn’t able to continue
my physically demanding job because of injuries—I was in a real tough spot. It
was not a love for computers that drove me to practice coding, although I do
love computers. Instead it was the fact that I was sick of being poor.

Making money from crime is extremely hard if you’ve never tried. It often seems
like you are two steps behind everyone else—and the competition is fierce. And
when you do get ahead, you have to be very careful because everyone you know
wants to rob you.

Making money from code is equally hard. You have to be *practiced *at your
craft, and you will feel like you are two steps behind everyone—at least for the
first year. The competition is nothing to worry about once you have practiced
enough, but just like the crime world you will be at the bottom of the food
chain when you start. When you begin down this path, clients will try to cheat
you at first. Once you are making more money, other entities will be after you
as well (the IRS, ex wives, everyone).

The thing about both of these activities is that they are lucrative. That’s why
so many people are in jail; every time an illegal sale of any type is made,
someone is missing out on a paycheck. So since they aren’t able to tax these
guys, they send them to jail. Working for a company that makes computer programs
is lucrative because of two sad truths:

 

1.  There aren’t very many smart people in the world.

2.  Many smart people aren’t reliable.

 

If you are a sharp cookie, you’ll realize that this can be exploited. I will
allow you to believe you are a smart person under one condition; you must be
open to all forms of correction. If you do not have this trait, you are already
not smart.

So you’ve got the smartness down, now you just need to be reliable, right?

Yes that is absolutely correct. The catch is that being a reliable coder is not
easy. In fact many people never become reliable at writing code. Even the most
experienced people can completely fuck up the architecture for the backend for
an application with multiple user interfaces, for instance. This can screw an
entire million dollar project sideways. I’ve seen this happen and I have seen
coders who are *much *more skilled than myself get fired for being unreliable or
unteachable.

This book is about becoming a reliable coder and using that as a stepping stone
to other things.

 

2. You, are a Minion. 
----------------------

I will lay out in this chapter what you must do to become the lowest of the low
level ‘developers’. This path may not be for everyone; adjust as you see fit.
This is simply what I know works.

Your first programming job will probably come from craigslist. If you begin
searching you will see many of these jobs require you have a Bachelors degree or
better. If you are a dropout simply list the college you attended on your
resume. If you have no college education be ready to fabricate one. The purpose
of a college degree is to screen out the incompetent. By showing your competence
during the interview phase, you will cause your future employer to ‘gloss over’
your college education. The act of getting persons of authority to ‘gloss over’
details is truly an art—one that will become invaluable to you if you pursue the
path of the Polymath in our age.

When hunting for your first job, look for ads that were written by a real
person; avoid anything from an agency. From those written by a real person, zero
in on jobs that require you know a specific web framework. Popular web
frameworks that are relatively easy to learn are:

1.  Ruby on Rails

2.  express, node.js, ect.

3.  django

4.  php anything

Avoid the desire to go after jobs that advertise cool new tech like Angular;
there is a time and a place, but right now you are going to feel like an
impostor.

If you want real, actionable advice; start learning ruby on rails immediately
using this guide: <https://www.railstutorial.org/book>

I suggest this because there are always a ton of rails jobs. If for some reason
there are not many rails jobs, maybe you should pick something else. Either way,
find the most solid tutorial you can. Once you’ve found your text, hit it hard.

It will take you weeks of grueling work, probably, but just do it. Go through
that tutorial 2, 3, even 4 times. You will realize by the third time things are
familiar and you are much faster. This is also how you will learn one of the
great secrets of coding; practice makes perfect. It is seldom a waste of time to
write what is essentially the same code, twice.

I would like to write a tech book someday, I even considered putting some code
examples here or something. Instead I would like to write a beginners ruby/rails
book at a later date. Honestly you don’t need my book, just find your tutorial
and study it.

One word of caution; I have in the past wasted a lot of time because I was
studying a sub-par, or just flat out bad, tutorial. Make sure that the community
respects your source and you should be fine.

 

3. Pet Projects
---------------

Once you have mastered a tutorial (code someone else wrote), it’s time to create
something of your own. This can be very daunting at first. All I can say is use
whatever code generators you can. If you are using rails, watch rails casts
(google it).

You need something though, anything, you can put on your resume. It would be
best if you can run this project on your laptop during the interview and show
your potential employer how cool the thing you’re working on is. Even if it is
simple and not all that advanced; most popular apps are glorified blogs with
carts or social aspects. For your first pet project, avoid:

1.  music apps

2.  video apps

3.  chat apps

Create something simple and focus on getting it done. Interesting content matter
can often make all the difference.

If you’ve gotten this far there is no way you can fail.

Now you need another pet project, one you do for someone else. Start thinking of
family members who might need a website. Maybe someone with a local company that
has an old website, or none at all. The key during this second pet project is to
keep in mind what a future employer will be impressed by.

A future employer is unlikely to be impressed by ‘I built my uncle a website for
his construction company’. But ‘Head of dev ops at Goodluck Construction Inc.
Created and fulfilled internet growth program which analyzed customer data to
streamline the new customer acquisition process’, might be enough to win someone
over. Figure out how you can offer something that will be of value to the
business you are working for, and then put it into elegant words.

At this point you have a legitimate programming job on your resume, and college
credentials on your application will be the last thing on your future boss’s
mind. If you play your cards right he will be asking you all kinds of questions
about your time spent building that cool system for your relative’s small
business. And you’ll be excited to show the potential employer what you’ve been
doing more recently.

 

4. Interview Questions
----------------------

For most of us, this is the hardest part of an interview. If you are
professional enough, you may be able to skip these altogether. But the days of
getting a coding job without a few interview questions are coming to an end—at
least that’s the idea I get when reading accounts online of people going through
interviews.

My first coding interview was for a big company in silicon valley that my genius
drop out friend worked at. I only got the interview because of him—and because I
could answer a few ruby questions over the phone that the pre-screener asked.
What are the two ways to look up a hash key in ruby(sort of a trick question I
guess, the answer is by key and by string)? What does `@@ `mean in ruby? Simple
stuff.

When they let me know I had scored a full interview I was stoked. At this point
I had been studying hard for nearly 6 months which is an incredible amount of
hours when you are fully focussed. I realized from the pre-screening questions
that they would want to see real ruby skills, so I started studying advanced
ruby techniques. In hindsight this was a mistake.

When the remote phone interview came I was not ready at all. There was a pairing
session where the interviewer shared a terminal with me. I was instructed to
recreate the game battleship in code, playable by two players (at the command
line, I assumed). I started off on the right foot; building a simple data
structure for the game grid. But I quickly realized I didn’t know nearly enough
about ruby or program architecture in general to complete the game in an hour,
let alone a day. I made mistake after mistake; not something that will get you
hired without severe scrutiny. If they are going to hire someone that can’t just
bang out code, that person better have a great degree or something. The simple
truth is that you have to be really good at whatever the interviewer throws at
you. The more prestigious the company, the harder the questions will be.

After failing this interview I was pretty pissed. I felt like I could do this
job, if I just had the background information that everyone already in computer
science seemed to have in common, the background information about how other
scientists have done things, how they have succeeded and failed.

Thus began my journey into the darker parts of computer science that, when I was
just starting out, scared the living shit out of me. I am by nature a terrible
mathematician and by training a decent logician. I quickly learned that coders
like to sound more scientific than they are because *the people they admire are
brilliant scientists.* And a lot of these guys grew up in MIT doing a lot of
fantastic work in the 70s and 80s.

More recently these ideas have been applied to websites and phone applications,
and they have been refined and taken to new heights. But it is important to know
that our art is by nature esoteric. There is a lot of reverence for the great
works of the past and this can be used to your advantage in the interview.

The true path to understanding lies in the past; your boss most likely remembers
names like McCarthy and Sussman with fondness. The more of these buttons you can
push the better chance you have of controlling the interview, simple as that.
This tactic is used by interrogators world-wide and is part of the principal
called ‘know your enemy’.

Sure you could practice interview questions for several months, hoping that you
can cover the ones that will pop up in an interview. But in my experience this
is both a waste of time and very hard. You stand much better a chance if you
build a common ground between yourself and your future employer—this bridge can
be erected using the rare gems of computer science.

 

5. Gems of Computer Science
---------------------------

When you begin programing in a language like ruby, you learn all about why
objects are important. You learn that classes help organize your code, and you
learn how to write procedural code that is good for trivial tasks. You learn all
the basics of a language—but you are at massive disadvantage. A lot of the new
scripting languages exist to ease the pain of developing in Java or asp.net shit
holes. If you’ve never lived a coders life inside one of these shit holes, you
aren’t going to understand why ruby—or any other language—is any good for
anything.

The truth is that popular programming languages are popular because they appear
simple. What you are not told as a new coder is that underneath that simple and
clean programmer interface is a bunch of C code. Understanding that all code is
at some level the same thing is one of the most important steps towards
enlightenment.

Nothing made me realize this truth more than the book Structures and
Interpretation of Computer Programs (SICP). This is a book where the first
chapter is challenging the first several times you read it. Much like with the
web framework tutorial, you will be banging your head against this book. I have
read online many people talk about this book in high esteem; some people claim
to read through it in a few weeks. But really if you are serious about this I
don’t expect you to understand a single fucking thing at first. It is good to be
frustrated, because when you are frustrated you have a choice; give up, or bite
the bullet and try again.

It is through trying over and over that you will succeed. The chemistry of your
brain will change, your personality will change, you will begin to see the world
differently than others. These are the baby steps that are painful—and someday
you will feel bewilderment over how confused you were with the first three
chapters of SICP.

When you begin practicing something that is both an art and a profession, the
brilliance of the masters casts a long shadow. As a swordsman in the Ichi
school, the beginner is faced with failure immediately. You are forced to hold
two full sized boken (wooden swords), one in each hand. The beginner notices
right away that his hands are shaky. He cannot hold the left hand nearly the
same as the right. The dominant hand cut is slow and calculated, and the offhand
cut is an embarrassment. In the old days new students would train the vertical
cut alone for years because it is the hardest to perfect—it is from this base
that all other strategy flows.[^1]

Some will argue that an esoteric text like SICP is overly difficult and out of
date. They will argue that there are newer, better texts that will get you to
the same level of understanding quicker. To these people I say, ‘bull shit’. An
old, respected text gives you a potential link to your future employer. I am not
lying when I say that because I was able to explain some things about scheme
that I learned from SICP, I was able to land my first coding job. It was this
connection alone between my employer and myself that got me the job. Of course I
had a decent pet project and some other experience to show, but nothing like a
real programmer guy job or a computer science degree. My first boss had gone
through SICP at university and was fond of Lisp like me; once I realized this I
put a lisp slant on everything else I said for the rest of the interview and got
hired immediately. Camaraderie should not be underestimated!

[^1]: Now days, the masters move students through all the cuts as quickly as
possible, because otherwise they will lose interest and not return to class.

 

6. Depression and Family
------------------------

I hesitate to use the term *depression*, but I feel this chapter needs to be
written.

Chances are you were formerly a creative type, and that will come as a great
advantage while you are making your way as a coder. If you do end up working as
a coder you will be putting in extra hours for the first year or so, because you
will be slower than your colleges. Remember that if you get a job like this, you
will be expected to preform. Junior developer positions are for undergrads who
have good grades but cannot code—you will not get these jobs so don’t bother.
You have to go after entry level and lead positions with a small or non-existent
team. When you get one of these jobs the pressure will be on.

Not only will you be liable for meeting code deadlines, but you also will be
studying as much as an undergrad student. You will need to study at night and
work during the day probably. If you are married there is a good chance this
will ruin your marriage unless your spouse is the studying type and already
preoccupied. If they are not the studying type they may leave you for someone
who is less busy/analytical. Remember that this is going to change who you are;
be prepared for people to react negatively.

The stress from this job will probably make you depressed at first. My advice is
to get better at coding quickly—the sooner you are good at this job the sooner
you can stop studying all night and working all day. It can be both challenging
and draining depending on your current life style. The good news is that once
you are an excellent coder, you can probably work for 4-6 hours a day if you
want, from home.

I often wonder to myself if it was worth it. YMMV.

 

7. Beyond Coding
----------------

You must have an objective beyond coding, and setting that objective will be
difficult in your infant stages. You are just discovering what you are capable
of, just now finally puling back the blinders from your eyes.
